Please read the README file in this directory first.
.ex
.Id $Id: procmailrc.man,v 1.41 1994/05/26 14:12:11 berg Exp $
.TH PROCMAILRC 5 \*(Dt BuGless
.na
.SH NAME
procmailrc \- procmail rcfile
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B $HOME/@PROCMAILRC@
.ad
.SH DESCRIPTION
For a quick start, see
.B NOTES
at the end of the
.BR procmail (1)
man page.
.PP
The rcfile can contain a mixture of environment variable assignments (some
of which have special meanings to procmail), and recipes.  In their most
simple appearance, the recipes are simply one line regular expressions
that are searched for in the header of the arriving mail, the first recipe
that matches is used to determine where the mail has to go (usually a file).
.PP
If a matching recipe does not specify any special flags (like `@FILTER@' or
`@CONTINUE@') and the recipe is successful (i.e. no write failures or other
calamities), then processing of the rcfile will cease at this point, and
procmail will consider the mail to have been delivered.
.PP
This enables you to presort your mail extremely straightforward into several
mailfolders.  Bear in mind though that the mail can arrive concurrently in
these mailfolders (if several procmail programs happen to run at the same time,
not unlikely if a lot of mail arrives), to make sure this does not result in a
mess, proper use of lockfiles is highly recommended.
.PP
The environment variable
.B assignments
and
.B recipes
can be freely intermixed in the rcfile. If any environment variable has
a special meaning to procmail, it will be used appropriately the moment
it is parsed. (i.e. you can change the current directory whenever you
want by specifying a new
.BR MAILDIR ,
switch lockfiles by specifying a new
.BR LOCKFILE ,
change the umask at any time, etc., the possibilities are endless :-).
.PP
The assignments and substitutions of these environment variables are handled
exactly like in
.BR sh (1)
(that includes all possible quotes and escapes),
with the added bonus that blanks around the '=' sign are ignored and that,
if an environment variable appears without a trailing '=', it will be
removed from the environment.  Any program in backquotes started by procmail
will have the entire mail at its stdin.
.PP
.SS Comments
A word beginning with # and all the following characters up to a NEWLINE
are ignored.
.SS Recipes
.PP
A line starting with ':' marks the beginning of a recipe.  It has the
following format:
.Sx 3
: [\fInumber\fP] [\fIflags\fP] [ : [\fIlocallockfile\fP] ]
<zero or more conditions (one per line)>
<exactly one action line>
.Ex
The
.I number
is optional (defaults to 1) and specifies the number of conditions that
follow the first line of the recipe.  Conditions are complete lines that are
passed on to the internal egrep
.BR literally ,
except for leading and trailing whitespace.  If you start every condition
line with an `*', you do not need to specify
.IR number .
Whitespace after the leading `*' are ignored.  The safest way would be
to specify
.I number
to be zero in that case (to avoid problems when you have no conditions, but
procmail expects one).
These regular expressions are
.B completely
compatible to the normal
.BR egrep (1)
regular expressions.
.PP
Conditions are anded; if
.I number
is zero, then the condition is always true and no conditions are expected
next.
.PP
.I Flags
can be any of the following:
.TP 0.5i
.B @HEAD_GREP@
Egrep the header (default).
.TP
.B @BODY_GREP@
Egrep the body.
.TP
.B @DISTINGUISH_CASE@
Tell the internal egrep to distinguish between upper and lower case (contrary
to the default which is to ignore case).
.TP
.B @ALSO_NEXT_RECIPE@
This recipe will depend on the last preceding recipe (on the current
block-nesting level) without the `@ALSO_NEXT_RECIPE@' or `@ALSO_N_IF_SUCC@'
flag.  This allows you to chain actions that depend on a common condition.
The number of conditions that are expected to follow default to none.
.TP
.B @ALSO_N_IF_SUCC@
Has the same meaning as the `@ALSO_NEXT_RECIPE@' flag, but will depend on the
.I successful
completion of the immediately preceding recipe as well.
.Tp
.B @ELSE_DO@
This recipe only executes if the immediately preceding recipe was not
executed.  Execution of this recipe also disables any immediately
following recipes with the '@ELSE_DO@' flag.  This allows you to specify
`else if' actions.
The number of conditions that are expected to follow default to none.
.Tp
.B @ERROR_DO@
This recipe only executes if the immediately preceding recipe failed.
This allows you to specify `error' actions.
The number of conditions that are expected to follow default to none.
.TP
.B @PASS_HEAD@
Feed the header to the pipe (default).
.TP
.B @PASS_BODY@
Feed the body to the pipe (default).
.TP
.B @FILTER@
Consider the pipe as a filter.
.TP
.B @CONTINUE@
Continue processing the rcfile even if this recipe matches (not needed
when `@FILTER@' is specified).  On nesting blocks this will clone the
running procmail process (lockfiles can not be inherited).
.TP
.B @WAIT_EXIT@
Wait for the filter or program to finish and check its exitcode (normally
ignored); if the filter is unsuccessful, then the text will not have been
filtered.
.TP
.B @WAIT_EXIT_QUIET@
Has the same meaning as the `@WAIT_EXIT@' flag, but will suppress any
`Program failure' message.
.TP
.B @IGNORE_WRITERR@
Ignore any write errors on this recipe (i.e. usually due to an early closed
pipe).
.PP
There are some special conditions you can use that are not straight regular
expressions.  To select them, the first character of the condition must
be a:
.TP 0.5i
.B !
Invert the condition.
.TP
.B $
Evaluate the remainder according to
.BR sh (1)
substitution rules inside double quotes, skip leading whitespace,
then reparse it.
.TP
.B ?
Use the exitcode of the specified program.
.TP
.B <
Check if the total length of the mail is shorter than the specified (in
decimal) number of bytes.
.TP
.B >
Analogous to '<'.
.TP
.B \e
To quote any of the above at the start of the line.
.SS "Local lockfile"
.PP
If you put a second (trailing) ':' on the first recipe line, then procmail
will use a
.I locallockfile
(for this recipe only).  You can optionally specify the locallockfile
to use; if you don't however, procmail will use the destination filename
(or the filename following the first '>>') and will append $LOCKEXT to it.
.SS "Recipe action line"
.PP
The action line can start with the following characters:
.TP
.B !
Forwards to all the specified mail addresses.
.TP
.B |
Starts the specified program, possibly in $SHELL if any
of the characters $SHELLMETAS are spotted.  You can optionally prepend this
pipe symbol with
.IR variable= ,
which will cause stdout of the program to be captured in the environment
.IR variable .
If you specify just this pipe symbol, without any program, then procmail will
pipe the mail to stdout.
.TP
.B {
Followed by at least one space, tab or newline will mark the start of a
nesting block.  Everything up till the next closing brace will depend on
the conditions specified for this recipe.  Unlimited nesting is permitted.
.PP
Anything else will be taken as a mailbox name (either a filename or a
directory, absolute or relative to the current directory (see MAILDIR)).
If it is a filename (or nonexistent), the mail will be appended to it.
.PP
If it is a directory, the mail will be delivered to a newly created, guaranteed
to be unique file named $MSGPREFIX* in the specified directory.  If the
directory name ends in "@MCDIRSEP@@chCURDIR@", then this directory is presumed
to be an MH folder; i.e. procmail will use the next number it finds available.
When procmail is delivering to directories, you can specify multiple
directories to deliver to (using hardlinks).
.SS "Environment variable defaults"
.TP 2.2i
.B "LOGNAME, HOME and SHELL"
Your (the recipient's) defaults
.TP
.B SHELLMETAS
\&@DEFshellmetas@
.TP
.B SHELLFLAGS
\&@DEFshellflags@
.TP
.BR ORGMAIL
\&@SYSTEM_MBOX@
.TP
.B MAILDIR
\&@DEFmaildir@
.br
(Unless the name of the first successfully opened rcfile starts with
`@chCURDIR@@MCDIRSEP@', in which case it defaults to `@chCURDIR@')
.TP
.B DEFAULT
\&@DEFdefault@
.TP
.B MSGPREFIX
\&@DEFmsgprefix@
.TP
.B SENDMAIL
\&@DEFsendmail@
.TP
.B HOST
The current hostname
.TP
.B COMSAT
\&@DEFcomsat@
.br
(If an rcfile is specified on the command line)
.TP
.B LOCKEXT
\&@DEFlockext@@PRESTENV@@LD_ENV_FIX@
.SS Environment
.PP
Before you get lost in the multitude of environment variables, keep in mind
that all of them have reasonable defaults.
.TP 1.2i
.B MAILDIR
Current directory while procmail is executing (that means that all paths
are relative to $MAILDIR).
.TP
.B DEFAULT
Default
.B mailbox
file (if not told otherwise, procmail will dump mail in this mailbox).
Procmail will automatically use $DEFAULT$LOCKEXT as lockfile prior to writing
to this mailbox.
.TP
.B LOGFILE
This file will also contain any error or diagnostic messages from procmail
(normally none :-) or any other programs started by procmail.  If this file
is not specified, any diagnostics or error messages will
@pconsole@@console@@aconsole@
See also
.BR LOGABSTRACT .
.TP
.B VERBOSE
You can turn on
.I extended diagnostics
by setting this variable to `yes' or `on', to turn it off again set it to `no'
or `off'.
.TP
.B LOGABSTRACT
Just before procmail exits it logs an abstract of the delivered message in
$LOGFILE showing the `@FROM@' and `Subject:' fields of the header, what folder
it finally went to and how long (in bytes) the message was.  By setting this
variable to `no', generation of this abstract is suppressed.
.TP
.B LOG
Anything assigned to this variable will be appended to $LOGFILE.
.TP
.B ORGMAIL
Usually the system mailbox (\fBOR\fPi\fBG\fPinal \fBMAIL\fPbox).  If, for
some obscure reason (like `\fBfilesystem full\fP') the mail could not be
delivered, then this mailbox will be the last resort.  If procmail
fails to save the mail in here (deep, deep trouble :-), then the mail
will bounce back to the sender.
.TP
.B LOCKFILE
Global semaphore file.  If this file already exists, procmail
will wait until it has gone before proceeding, and will create it itself
(cleaning it up when ready, of course).  If more than one
.I lockfile
are specified, then the previous one will be removed before trying to create
the new one.  The use of a global lockfile is discouraged, whenever possible
use locallockfiles (on a per recipe basis) instead.
.TP
.B LOCKEXT
Default extension that is appended to a destination file to determine
what local
.I lockfile
to use (only if turned on, on a per-recipe basis).
.TP
.B LOCKSLEEP
Number of seconds procmail will sleep before retrying on a
.I lockfile
(if it already existed); if not specified, it defaults to @DEFlocksleep@
seconds.
.TP
.B LOCKTIMEOUT
Number of seconds that have to have passed since a
.I lockfile
was last modified/created before procmail decides that this must be an
erroneously leftover lockfile that can be removed by force now.  If zero,
then no timeout will be used and procmail will wait forever until the
lockfile is removed; if not specified, it defaults to @DEFlocktimeout@ seconds.
This variable is useful to prevent indefinite hangups of
.BR sendmail /procmail.
Procmail is immune to clock skew across machines.
.TP
.B TIMEOUT
Number of seconds that have to have passed before procmail decides that
some child it started must be hanging.  The offending program will receive
a TERMINATE signal from procmail, and processing of the rcfile will continue.
If zero, then no timeout will be used and procmail will wait forever until the
child has terminated; if not specified, it defaults to @DEFtimeout@ seconds.
.TP
.B MSGPREFIX
Filename prefix that is used when delivering to a directory (not used when
delivering to an MH directory).
.TP
.B HOST
If this is not the
.I hostname
of the machine, processing of the current
.I rcfile
will immediately cease. If other rcfiles were specified on the
command line, processing will continue with the next one.  If all rcfiles
are exhausted, the program will terminate, but will not generate an error
(i.e. to the mailer it will seem that the mail has been delivered).
.TP
.B UMASK
The name says it all (if it doesn't, then forget about this one :-).
Anything assigned to UMASK is taken as an
.B octal
number.  If not specified, the umask defaults to @INIT_UMASK@.  If the umask
permits o+x, all the mailboxes procmail delivers to directly will receive
an o+x mode change.  This can be used to check if new mail arrived.
.TP
.B SHELLMETAS
If any of the characters in SHELLMETAS appears in the line specifying
a filter or program, the line will be fed to $SHELL
instead of being executed directly.
.TP
.B SHELLFLAGS
Any invocation of $SHELL will be like:
.br
"$SHELL" "$SHELLFLAGS" "$*";
.TP
.B SENDMAIL
If you're not using the
.I forwarding
facility don't worry about this one.  It specifies the program being
called to forward any mail.
.br
It gets invoked as: "$SENDMAIL" "$@";
.TP
.B NORESRETRY
Number of retries that are to be made if any `\fBprocess table full\fP',
`\fBfile table full\fP', `\fBout of memory\fP' or
`\fBout of swap space\fP' error should occur.  If this number is negative,
then procmail will retry indefinitely; if not specified, it defaults to
@DEFnoresretry@ times.  The retries occur with a $SUSPEND second interval.  The
idea behind this is, that if e.g. the
.I swap
.I space
has been exhausted or the
.I process
.I table
is full, usually several other programs will either detect this as well
and abort or crash 8-), thereby freeing valuable
.I resources
for procmail.
.TP
.B SUSPEND
Number of seconds that procmail will pause if it has to wait for something
that is currently unavailable (memory, fork, etc.); if not specified, it will
default to @DEFsuspend@ seconds.  See also:
.BR LOCKSLEEP .
.TP
.B LINEBUF
Length of the internal line buffers, cannot be set smaller than @MINlinebuf@.
All lines read from the
.I rcfile
should not exceed $LINEBUF characters before and after expansion.  If not
specified, it defaults to @DEFlinebuf@.  This limit, of course, does
.I not
apply to the mail itself, which can have arbitrary line lengths, or could
be a binary file for that matter.
.TP
.B DELIVERED
If set to `yes' procmail will pretend (to the mail agent) the mail
has been delivered.  If mail cannot be delivered after meeting this
assignment (to `yes'), the mail will be lost (i.e. it will not bounce).
.TP
.B TRAP
When procmail terminates it will execute the contents of this variable.
A copy of the mail can be read from stdin.  Any output produced by this
command will be appended to $LOGFILE.  Possible uses for TRAP are: removal
of temporary files, logging customised abstracts, etc.  See also
.B EXITCODE
and
.BR LOGABSTRACT .
.Tp
.B EXITCODE
When procmail terminates and this variable has been set to a positive numeric
value, procmail will use this as the exitcode.  If this variable is set but
empty, procmail will set the exitcode to whatever the
.B TRAP
program returns.
If this variable has not been set, procmail will set it shortly before calling
up the
.B TRAP
program.
.TP
.B LASTFOLDER
This variable is assigned to by procmail whenever it is delivering
to a folder or program.  It always contains the name of the last folder
(or program) procmail delivered to.
.Tp
.B SHIFT
Assigning a positive value to this variable has the same effect as
the `shift' command in
.BR sh (1).
This command is most useful to extract extra arguments passed to procmail
when acting as a generic mailfilter.
.TP
.B INCLUDERC
Names an rcfile (relative to the current directory) which will be included
here as if it were part of the current rcfile.  Unlimited nesting is
permitted.
.TP
.B COMSAT
.BR Comsat (8)/ biff (1)
notification is on by default, it can be turned off by setting this variable
to `no'.  Alternatively the biff-service can be customised by setting it to
either `service@SERV_ADDRsep@', `@SERV_ADDRsep@hostname', or
`service@SERV_ADDRsep@hostname'.  When not specified it defaults
to @COMSATservice@@SERV_ADDRsep@@COMSAThost@.@DROPPRIVS@
.SH EXAMPLES
Look in the
.BR procmailex (5)
man page.
.SH CAVEATS
Continued lines in an action line that specifies a program always have to end
in a backslash, even if the underlying shell would not need or want the
backslash to indicate continuation.  This is due to the two pass parsing
process needed (first procmail, then the shell (or not, depending on
.BR SHELLMETAS )).
.PP
Don't put comments on the regular expression condition lines in a
recipe, these lines are fed to the internal egrep
.I literally
(except for continuation backslashes at the end of a line).
.PP
Leading whitespace on continued regular expression condition lines
is usually ignored (so that they can be indented), but
.B not
on continued condition lines that are evaluated according to the
.BR sh (1)
substitution rules inside double quotes.
.PP
Watch out for deadlocks when doing unhealthy things like forwarding mail
to your own account.  Deadlocks can be broken by proper use of
.BR LOCKTIMEOUT .
.PP
Any default values that procmail has for some environment variables will
.B always
override the ones that were already defined.  If you really want to
override the defaults, you either have to put them in the
.B rcfile
or on the command line as arguments.
.PP
Environment variables set
.B inside
the action part of a recipe will
.B not
retain their value after the recipe has finished since they are set in a
subshell of procmail.  To make sure the value of an environment variable is
retained you have to put the assignment to the variable before the leading `|'
of a recipe, so that it can capture stdout of the program.
.PP
If you specify only a `@PASS_HEAD@' or a `@PASS_BODY@' flag on a recipe,
and the recipe matches, then, unless a `@FILTER@' or `@CONTINUE@' flag is
present as well, the body respectively the header of the mail will be silently
lost.
.PP
The `@CONTINUE@' flag defaults to on when capturing stdout of a recipe in an
environment variable.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.na
.nh
.BR procmail (1),
.BR procmailsc (5),
.BR procmailex (5),
.BR sh (1),
.BR csh (1),
.BR mail (1),
.BR mailx (1),
.BR binmail (1),
.BR uucp (1),
.BR aliases (5),
.BR sendmail (8),
.BR egrep (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR biff (1),
.BR comsat (8),
.BR lockfile (1),
.BR formail (1)
.hy
.ad
.SH BUGS
The only substitutions of environment variables that can be handled by
procmail itself are of the type $name, ${name}, ${name:-text}, ${name:+text},
${name-text}, ${name+text}, $#, $n, $$, $?, $_, $\- and $=; whereas $_ will be
substituted by the name of the current rcfile, $\- by $LASTFOLDER and $=
will contain the score of the last recipe.
When the
.B \-@ARGUMENTOPT@
or
.B \-@MAILFILTOPT@
options are used, "$@" will expand to respectively the specified argument
or the sender and recipient list; but only when passed as in the
argument list to a program.@UPPERCASE_USERNAMES@
.PP
Procmail does not support the expansion of `~'.
.PP
A line buffer of length $LINEBUF is used when processing the
.IR rcfile ,
any expansions
.B have
to fit within this limit; if they don't, behaviour is undefined.
.PP
If the global lockfile has a
.I relative
path, and the current directory
is not the same as when the global lockfile was created, then the global
lockfile will not be removed if procmail exits at that point (remedy:
use
.I absolute
paths to specify global lockfiles).
.PP
When capturing stdout from a recipe into an environment variable, exactly
one trailing newline will be stripped.
.PP
By using the `^' or `$' in other spots than at the start respectively
end of a regular expression you can use the internal egrep to do multiline
matches.
.PP
When the regular expression starts with `^^' it will anchor the match
at the very start of the text.
.PP
The start and end of a word can be matched by `\e<' and `\e>'.  They
are merely a shorthand for `[^a-zA-Z0-9_]', but can also match newlines.
Since they match actual characters, they are only suitable to delimit
words, not to delimit inter-word space.
.SH MISCELLANEOUS
If the regular expression contains `\fB@TOkey@\fP' it will be substituted by
.na
.nh
`\fB@TOsubstitute@\fP',
which should catch all destination specifications.
.hy
.ad
.PP
If the regular expression contains `\fB@FROMDkey@\fP' it will be
substituted by
.na
.nh
`\fB@FROMDsubstitute@\fP',
which should catch mails coming from most daemons (how's that for a regular
expression :-).
.hy
.ad
.PP
If the regular expression contains `\fB@FROMMkey@\fP' it will be
substituted by
.na
.nh
`\fB@FROMMsubstitute@\fP'
(a stripped down version of `\fB@FROMDkey@\fP'),
which should catch mails coming from most mailer-daemons.
.hy
.ad
.PP
When assigning boolean values to variables like VERBOSE, DELIVERED or COMSAT,
procmail accepts as true every string starting with: a non-zero value, `on',
`y', `t' or `e'.  False is every string starting with: a zero value, `off',
`n', `f' or 'd'.
.PP
If the action line of a recipe specifies a program, a sole backslash-newline
pair in it on an otherwise empty line will be converted into a newline.
.SH NOTES
Since unquoted leading whitespace is generally ignored in the rcfile you can
indent everything to taste.
.PP
The leading `|' on the action line to specify a program or filter is stripped
before checking for $SHELLMETAS.
.PP
Files included with the INCLUDERC directive containing only environment
variable assignments can be shared with sh.
.PP
For
.I really
complicated processing you can even consider calling
.B procmail
recursively.
